Fix/Cheetah template macros (#2509)
cobbler/cobbler: docs/user-guide/extending-cobbler.rst

*****************
Extending Cobbler
*****************

This section covers methods to extend the functionality of Cobbler through the use of :ref:`triggers` and
:ref:`modules`, as well as through extensions to the Cheetah templating system.

.. _triggers:

Triggers
########

About
=====

Cobbler triggers provide a way to tie user-defined actions to certain Cobbler commands -- for instance, to provide
additional logging, integration with apps like Puppet or cfengine, set up SSH keys, tieing in with a DNS server
configuration script, or for some other purpose.

> Cobbler Triggers should be Python modules written using the low-level Python API for maximum speed, but could also be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cobbler triggers should be Python modules using the low-level Python API for maximum speed, but could also be
```

Author: That is indeed correct since there are "Cobbler Triggers".

Reviewer: Ah, I did not know that. The word `written` still sounds strange in this context.

Trigger Names (for Old-Style Triggers)
======================================

Cobbler script-based triggers are scripts installed in the following locations, and must be made ``chmod +x``.

* ``/var/lib/cobbler/triggers/add/system/pre/*``
* ``/var/lib/cobbler/triggers/add/system/post/*``
* ``/var/lib/cobbler/triggers/add/profile/pre/*``
* ``/var/lib/cobbler/triggers/add/profile/post/*``
* ``/var/lib/cobbler/triggers/add/distro/pre/*``
* ``/var/lib/cobbler/triggers/add/distro/post/*``
* ``/var/lib/cobbler/triggers/add/repo/pre/*``
* ``/var/lib/cobbler/triggers/add/repo/post/*``
* ``/var/lib/cobbler/triggers/sync/pre/*``
* ``/var/lib/cobbler/triggers/sync/post/*``
* ``/var/lib/cobbler/triggers/install/pre/*``
* ``/var/lib/cobbler/triggers/install/post/*``

And the same as the above replacing "add" with "remove".

Pre-triggers are capable of failing an operation if they return anything other than 0. They are to be thought of as
"validation" filters. Post-triggers cannot fail an operation and are to be thought of notifications.

We may add additional types as time goes on.

Pure Python Triggers
====================

> As mentioned earlier, triggers can be written in pure python, and many of these kinds of triggers ship with Cobbler as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned earlier, triggers can be written in pure Python, and many of these kinds of triggers ship with Cobbler as
```

stock.

Look in your ``site-packages/cobbler/modules`` directory and cat "``install_post_report.py``" for an example trigger

> that sends email when a system gets done installing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that sends email when a system finished installation.
```

> Notice how the trigger has a register method with a path that matches with the shell patterns above. That's how we know
> what type each trigger is.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice how the trigger has a register method with a path that matches the shell patterns above. That's how we find out the type of trigger.
```

    #!/bin/bash
    echo "Hi, my name is $1 and I'm a newly added system"

However that's not very interesting as all you get are the names passed across. For triggers to be the most powerful,
they should take advantage of the Cobbler API -- which means writing them as a Python module.

Performance Note
================

If you have a very large number of systems, using the Cobbler API from scripts with old style (non-Python modules, just
scripts in ``/var/lib/cobbler/triggers``) is a very very bad idea. The reason for this is that the Cobbler API brings
the Cobbler engine up with it, and since it's a seperate process, you have to wait for that to load. If you invoke 3000
triggers editing 3000 objects, you can see where this would get slow pretty quickly. However, if you write a modular
trigger (see above) this suffers no performance penalties -- it's crazy fast and you experience no problems.

Permissions
===========

The ``/var/lib/cobbler/triggers`` directory is only writeable by root (and are executed by Cobbler on a regular basis).
For security reasons do not loosen these permissions.

Example trigger for resetting Cfengine keys
===========================================

> Here is an example where Cobbler and cfengine are running on two different machines and xmlrpc is used to communicate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example where Cobbler and cfengine are running on two different machines and XMLRPC is used to communicate
```

between the hosts.

Note that this uses the Cobbler API so it's somewhat inefficient -- it should be converted to a Python module-based

> trigger. If it were in a pure Python modular trigger, it would fly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
trigger. If it would be a pure Python modular trigger, it would fly.
```

On the cfengine box, we run a daemon that does the following (along with a few steps to update our ``ssh_known_hosts``-
file):

.. code-block:: python

    #!/usr/bin/python
    import SimpleXMLRPCServer
    import os
    class Keys(object):
         def update(self, ip):
             try:
                os.unlink('/var/cfengine/ppkeys/root-%s.pub' % ip)
            except OSError:
                pass
    keys = Keys()
    server = SimpleXMLRPCServer.SimpleXMLRPCServer(("cfengine",9000))
    server.register_instance(keys)
    server.serve_forever()

See Also
========

* Post by Ithiriel: `Writing triggers <https://www.ithiriel.com/content/2010/03/29/writing-install-triggers-cobbler>`_

.. _modules:

Modules
#######

Certain Cobbler features can be user extended (in Python) by Cobbler users.

These features include storage of data (serialization), authorization, and authentication. Over time, this list of
module types will grow to support more options. :ref:`triggers` are basically modules.

See Also
========

* The Cobbler command line itself (it's implemented in Cobbler modules so it's easy to add new commands)

Python Files And modules.conf
=============================

> To create a module, add a python file in ``/usr/lib/python$version/site-packages/cobbler/modules``. Then, in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a module, add a Python file in ``/usr/lib/python$version/site-packages/cobbler/modules``. Then, in the
```

appropriate part of ``/etc/cobbler/modules.conf``, reference the name of your module so Cobbler knows that you want to
activate the module.

> (:ref:`triggers` that are python modules, as well as CLI python modules don't need to be listed in this file, they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(:ref:`triggers` that are Python modules, as well as CLI python modules don't need to be listed in this file, they
```

are auto-loaded)

An example from the serializers is:

.. code-block:: yaml

    [serializers]
    settings = serializer.file

The format of ``/etc/cobbler/modules.conf`` is that of Python's ConfigParser module.

> A setup file consists of sections, lead by a "[section]" header, and followed by "name: value" entries, with
> continuations and such in the style of RFC 822.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A setup file consists of sections, lead by a "[section]" header and followed by "name: value" entries with
continuations and such in the style of RFC 822.
```

Each module, regardless of it's nature, must have the following function that returns the type of module (as a string)
on an acceptable load (when the module can be loaded) or raises an exception otherwise.

The trivial case for a cli module is:

.. code-block:: python

    def register():
        return "cli"

Other than that, modules do not have a particular API signature -- they are "Duck Typed" based on how they are employed.
When starting a new module, look at other modules of the same type to see what functions they possess.

Cheetah Macros
##############

> Cobbler uses Cheetah for it’s templating system, it also wants to support other choices and may in the future support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cobbler uses Cheetah for its templating system, it also wants to support other choices and may in the future support
```

others.

> It is possible to add new functions to the templating engine, much like snippets, that provide the ability to do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to add new functions to the templating engine, much like snippets that provide the ability to do
```
